---
layout: post
title: Blog-with-Jekyll
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 24 April 2011 - Helsinki

h1. Make Your Blog using Jekyll within github

Github is one of the most popular version control systems. One of the neat feature of Github is you can use github as your personalized blogging site. Github, by default, runs Jekyll. Jekyll is a static HTML file generator which works on Markup, textile and HTML formated files.

* Prerequisite and installation
* Setup
* Make your first blog

h2. Prerequisite and installation

"Github":http://github.com , by default supports Jekyll. More info on Jekyll support on github can be found in "github pages":http://pages.github.com/. Using Jekyll with github requires an account in "github":http://github.com repository.
The account creation process is fairly straight forward.  

There are lot of good documentation in the Web regarding installation process. "Publishing a Blog with GitHub Pages and Jekyll":http://blog.envylabs.com/2009/08/publishing-a-blog-with-github-pages-and-jekyll/  and "Using Jekyll":http://alexyoung.org/2009/07/09/new-blog/ are couple of good sources for the starter. 

There is a caveat for people who want to test their blog sites locally before uploading. Jekyll will not install in Ubuntu 10.04 due dependency problem. A nice work around is provided by "Installing rubygems 1.3.7 and jekyll on Ubuntu 10.04":http://help.rubygems.org/discussions/problems/350-installing-rubygems-137-and-jekyll-on-ubuntu-1004 . However, you can installing Jekyll locally is not important for running a blog site. 

h2. Setup

This steps requires to setup template, layouts for blog sites. There are couple good sources in the github directory - "bruce.github.com":http://github.com/bruce/bruce.github.com/tree/master  to start with. You need to customize default layout

Disqus provides comment management system for sites. For comment setting using disqus with Jekyll "Adding disqus comments":http://dcreager.net/2009/08/07/disqus-comments/. Before setting up disqus with your blog site, make sure you have created an account with "disqus":http://disqus.com/

Blogs generated using Jekyll can be make more social using Facebook like button. Just follow the Facebook guidelines to add like button to your posts. "Facebook Like":http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/plugins/like/

h3. Writing your first blog

Jekyll supports Textile, Markitup and html formatted pages. There are couple of editors available. I am currently using online textile editor at "Textile editor":http://markitup.jaysalvat.com/examples/textile/
 
